# Sequence-based approach for protein solubility predictions using protein language models and machine learning algorithms

## Abstract

Protein solubility plays a crucial role in the design of soluble proteins for various industrial and therapeutic applications. Developing accurate predictive models for solubility is highly desirable, particularly in biocatalysis. Previous computational tools have integrated protein sequences and three-dimensional structure information to develop models for estimating solubility. However, there is still a need to enhance the accuracy of protein solubility prediction by designing improved computational methodologies. This work presents a sequence-based approach for training predictive solubility models by combining machine learning algorithms with protein language models in an integrated assembled predictive system. The proposed approach achieves a 0.74 Pearson's coefficient, the highest performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods, and a precision of 76\%, comparable with the highest performance of methods available in the literature. To demonstrate the usefulness of the implemented model, a reconstruction of the mutational landscape for the ACE2 protein was developed, allowing the recognition of mutational variants that favor increased solubility. The combination of high performance and ease of integration into existing protein improvement strategies positions the proposed methodology as a highly favorable alternative to current protein solubility prediction methods.


